Chapter 1
An Ordinary Girl
 Many years ago in the city of New York, there lived a doctor. America likes
doctors and New York liked Dr Sloper. At the time our story begins, in 1843, Dr
Sloper was fifty years old. He was a good doctor, he was a man of the world, and he
was honest.
 Life was good to him. At twenty-seven he married a beautiful and clever girl.
She had pretty eyes, ten thousand dollars and a good place in society. For five years
Dr Sloper was a happy man. Many of his wife’s friends came to him and he did well
in his profession. They lived in a large house in Washington Square — a quiet corner
in a noisy city.
 Their first child, a very clever little boy, died when he was three. His mother’s
love and his father’s profession did not help him. Two years later, Mrs Sloper had a
second child, a girl. The doctor did not want a girl. But this was not the worst.Two
weeks later, Mrs Sloper died. The little girl’s name was Catherine. She was strong.
Her father was not afraid of losing her.
♦
 When the child was ten years old, Dr Sloper asked his sister, Mrs Lavinia
Penniman, to come and stay with them. Mr Penniman, a churchman without a penny,
died when Mrs Penniman was thirty-three. She had no children and no money.
 ‘Stay for six months,’ he said.
 ‘I will look for a flat,’ she said. She moved into her brother’s house and never
went away again. Mrs Penniman told everybody that the child wanted a clever woman
near her. Dr Sloper did not think his sister was clever, but he was always very polite
to her and never angry. They didn’t speak much. He gave her his opinions about
Catherine’s schooling and not much more.
 Catherine was very good and honest, but she was not pretty or clever. She was
quiet. She loved her father and was very afraid of him. She was happy when her father
was happy. The doctor wanted to be proud of her, but he wasn’t. He was
sometimes angry because his only child was ordinary. 

When she was eighteen, Catherine was a quiet young woman, but she began to
wear strong, noisy colours. Dr Sloper did not like her new dresses. He thought she
was vulgar.
 One day, Catherine’s other aunt, Mrs Almond, asked a lot of people to her
house. Mrs Almond was the younger of Dr Sloper’s two sisters. She was the wife of a
rich city man and the mother ol nine children. She was pretty, happy and clever,
and her brother liked her. When he wanted to talk about Catherine, he went to her and
not to Mrs Penniman. Catherine was close to her aunt's children. There were
seven boys and two girls. The older girl married young. The younger girl, called
Marian, soon decided to marry too. She found a young man called Arthur Townsend.
And so the Almonds asked everybody to the house.
♦
 Mrs Penniman and Catherine arrived at the Almonds’. The doctor planned to
come later.
 Soon after the dancing started, Marian Almond brought a tall young man over
to Catherine.
 ‘Catherine, this is Mr. Morris Townsend. He is from the same family as Arthur!
He wants to meet you very much!’
 Marian Almond was a pretty woman. At seventeen she moved easily in society.
She left Catherine and Mr Townsend together. Catherine looked at the young man. He
was very handsome. ‘What can I say to this handsome man?’ thought Catherine.
But Mr Townsend began to talk to her with an easy smile. 

‘What a nice evening! What a beautiful house! What an interesting family!
What a pretty girl Marian is!’
 He looked into Catherine’s eyes. She said nothing. He talked and she listened
and looked at him. The dancing began again. He asked her to dance and she gave him
her arm. After the dance, her face was red and she was hot.
 ‘We’ll sit and talk,’ said Mr Townsend. But he talked and Catherine listened.
Catherine sat back. She thought he was very clever. ‘This is my first visit to Mrs
Almond’s,’ he said. ‘And my first visit to New York for many years. 1 lived here
when I was a child but 1 left when I was twenty. I went round the world. I came back
to New York only a month ago. It is a nice city but I don’t know anybody. You see,
people forget you,’ he said and smiled at Catherine.
 Catherine thought, ‘I’ll never forget you.’

They sat there for some time. They laughed together. He asked her about the
people near them. He gave his opinions about them. She thought he was very honest.
Then Marian Almond came back and took Mr Townsend away to her mother.
 ‘We’ll meet again,’ he said to Catherine. Marian came back and took
Catherine’s arm. They walked round the room together:
 ‘What do you think of Morris?’ she said.
 For the first time in her life Catherine did not tell the truth. ‘Oh, nothing much,’
she answered.
 ‘I’ll tell him that!’ cried Marian. ‘It will be good for him. He has a very good
opinion of Morris Townsend! Arthur says that, and Arthur knows him.’
 Half an hour later, Catherine saw her Aunt Penniman near a window. Morris
Townsend stood next to her. Then Dr Sloper arrived. He usually had a little smile on
his face, but never a big smile. He looked at his daughter’s red dress.
 ‘Can this handsome woman be my child?’ he asked. Catherine did not always
understand her father’s words.
 ‘I’m not handsome,’ she said, quietly.
 ‘You’re rich!’ he said. ‘Is the evening going well?’
 ‘I’m rather tired,’ she answered and looked away. That evening was the
beginning of something important for Catherine. For the second time in her life and in
one evening, she did not speak the truth. She was not tired. They drove home. Dr
Sloper spoke to his sister, Lavinia.
 ‘Who was the young man who spoke of his love for you?’
 ‘Oh, Austin,’ said Mrs Penniman. She smiled. ‘He spoke to me of Catherine.’
 ‘Oh, Aunt Penniman,’ Catherine cried out, quietly.
 ‘He’s very handsome. He’s very clever,’ said her aunt.
 ‘He’s in love with our expensive Catherine, then?’ the doctor asked. He
laughed.
 ‘I don’t know that. But he liked her dress.’
 Catherine did not think, ‘My dress only?’ She thought what a warm and rich
thing to say.
 ‘You see,’ said her father. ‘He thinks she has eighty thousand dollars.’

‘In my opinion, he doesn’t think of that; he’s not a vulgar man,’ said Mrs
Penniman.
 ‘The time is here,’ the doctor thought. ‘Lavinia is going to get a lover for
Catherine. I’m sorry for the girl.’

Chapter 2
A Man with No Profession
 Three or four days later, Morris Townsend, together with Arthur Townsend,
visited Washington Square.
 ‘Arthur is going to marry my sister’s daughter, Marian, so the polite thing is for
Arthur to visit me,’ Aunt Penniman said to Catherine before they came.
 And here they were. Arthur sat with Catherine, Morris sat with Mrs Penniman.
Catherine tried to listen to Morris and her aunt. Morris often looked over at Catherine
and smiled. Then Arthur began to talk about Morris so Catherine began to listen to
him.
 ‘Morris asked me to bring him. He wanted to come very much. He loves going
out into society.’
 ‘We’re very happy to see him,’ said Catherine.
 ‘Most people like him — he’s very interesting. But some people call him too
clever.’
 ‘Now he’s back in New York, will he stay here?’
 ‘Ah,’ said Arthur, ‘he wants to find a job.’
 ‘What? He has no profession?’ said Catherine.
 ‘No. He’s looking round, but he can’t find anything.’
 ‘I’m very sorry,’ said Catherine.
 ‘Oh, he takes life easy,’ said Arthur. ‘The job must be right for him.’
 ‘Will his father take him into his office?’ she asked.
 ‘His father is dead — he only has a sister.’ He looked at Morris and began to
laugh. ‘We’re talking about you.’
 Morris stood up. ‘I cannot say the same about you, Arthur,’ he said. ‘But I can
about Miss Sloper.’
 Catherine’s face went red. She thought he spoke very well.
 ‘I came to talk to you, Miss Sloper,’ he said. ‘So now I must come another
time. ’The two young men left.

‘He’s very interested in you, Catherine.’
 ‘Did he say that?’
 ‘Not in those words. But he wanted me to think it. I understand young men.’
 ‘But he doesn’t know me.’
 ‘Oh yes, he knows you. I told him all about you.’
 ‘Oh, Aunt Penniman. We don’t know him or his family.’
 ‘Catherine, you know very well that you like him.’
 Catherine did not think this was a thing to talk about. And she did not think that
Aunt Penniman spoke the truth.
 ♦
 Half an hour later, Dr Sloper came home. Mrs Penniman told him of Morris
Townsend’s visit.
 ‘Oh, and did he ask you to marry him, Catherine?’ he asked.
 ‘Oh, father!’ said Catherine quietly. She turned and looked at the dark sky
through the window.
 ‘He will ask you first, Austin,’ said Lavinia, and smiled.
 ‘The next time he comes, call me,’ the doctor said.
 But the next time Mr Townsend came, the doctor was out again. Mrs Penniman
left the two young people together. The visit was quite long. He sat there, in the
biggest chair, by the fire, for more than an hour. He looked round the room carefully,
at all the things in it. He looked at Catherine carefully. There was a smile in his
handsome eyes. His talk was light and easy. He asked Catherine many questions. Did
she like this? Did she like that?
 ‘Tell me about you,’ he said. ‘Give me a picture — I can carry it in my head.’
She said she didn’t have much to tell. She didn’t go out very often. She didn’t like
reading much. Morris said he liked singing. ‘I’ll sing to you, but not today. Perhaps
next time.’
 He did not say, politely, ‘I will sing and you can play for me.’ He thought of
this after he was in the street. But Catherine thought only about his words ‘next time’.
They had a warm sound. As soon as the doctor came home, she told him about Morris
Townsend’s second visit. 

‘And did he ask you to marry him today?’ the doctor asked.
 She was afraid of this question.
 ‘Perhaps he’ll do it next time,’ she said, and she gave a little laugh. She ran out
of the room.
 The doctor stood and thought. Perhaps his daughter wanted to marry Morris
Townsend. He decided to learn about this young man, who came in and out of his
house when he liked. He went to see Mrs Almond. 

‘Lavinia is very excited, but I know very little about him,’ said Mrs Almond.
 ‘And our young man is from Arthur’s family?’
 ‘Yes, but not close family. The name is the same, but I understand there are
Townsends and there are Townsends. Arthur is from the best line of that family,
Lavinia’s young man is not. I know his sister. She is very nice. Her name is Mrs
Montgomery. Her husband is dead, she has a nice small house, and she has
five children. She lives on Second Avenue.’
 ‘What does Mrs. Montgomery say about him?’
 ‘That he’s clever and perhaps he’ll be important.’
 ‘But he does nothing.’
 ‘She doesn’t say that.’
 ‘She’s proud,’ said the doctor. ‘What is his profession?’
 ‘He hasn’t got a profession. He’s looking for something. He was at sea.’
 ‘Was? How old is he?’
 ‘Thirty-something. He went to sea when he was very young. Some money
came to him — somebody in his family died, I think. He went all over the world. He
has no money now. He decided to begin his life again and so he came back to
America.’
 ‘Does he want to marry Catherine, then?’
 ‘Don’t forget that after you die she’ll have thirty thousand dollars.’
 ‘And that’s why he thinks she’s nice!’
 Mrs. Almond went red. ‘Not only that!’ she said. ‘But many young men think
money is important.’
 ‘The young men of New York are not only interested in money. They also like
clever, pretty and exciting girls. Marian is clever, pretty and exciting. Catherine is
not.’
 ‘Marian is ordinary. Catherine is not. She has no lovers because men are afraid
of her. She is large and dresses richly. They think she is older than they are. Catherine
will be the right wife for an older man.’
 ‘Is Mr. Townsend honest?’
 ‘Lavinia thinks he is. And he’s very handsome.’
 ‘What money does he have?’
 ‘I don’t know. He lives with his sister.’
 ‘Perhaps I’ll visit Mrs. Montgomery.’

Chapter 3
Secrets
 To Dr Sloper, the thing was a game. He slept well, he ate well. ‘This young
man is trying to catch Catherine. I’ll watch and wait,’ he thought. He did not think his
daughter was in danger. Morris Townsend was not rich, but that was not important.
The doctor did not want Catherine to marry a rich man. ‘Two people can live on her
money. She can marry a man with no money. But he must be honest and strong and
have a good schooling,’ thought the doctor.
 ‘The next time Mr Townsend visits the house,’ said the doctor to Mrs
Penniman, ‘ask him to dinner.’
 The dinner happened a week later. Eight people sat down to eat. The doctor
watched Morris carefully. The women left the room after dinner, and then the doctor
asked Morris some questions. Dr Sloper pushed the bottle of Madeira over to Morris.
Morris liked the doctor’s Madeira. He thought a lot of bottles of Madeira was a good
thing for a wife’s father to have. The doctor saw that this was not an ordinary young
man. ‘He’s clever,’ he thought. ‘He has a very good head when he wants to use it.
And he’s very handsome and he dresses well. But I don’t like him.’ The doctor
listened politely to his young friend talk about countries round the world. ‘He talks
well — and after a bottle of Madeira! But does he always tell the truth?’

After dinner, Morris went and spoke to Catherine. She stood by the fire in her
red dress. ‘He doesn’t like me,’ said the young man. ‘You must tell him he’s wrong.’
 ‘I never tell him he’s wrong. I won’t talk about you.’
 Morris Townsend’s face was angry, but Catherine did not see it. And then he
smiled again.
 ‘Then I must try to get his good opinion.’
 He spoke to Mrs Penniman later in the evening. ‘He thinks I’m all wrong,’ he
said.
 ‘That’s not important,’ she said. She gave him a sugary smile. She thought that
she understood everything.
 ‘Ah, you say the right thing!’ said Morris. Mrs Penniman was proud that she
always said the right thing. 

The next day, the doctor saw his sister, Mrs Almond.
 ‘And what do you think of him?’ she asked. ‘Lavinia tells me Catherine loves
him.’
 ‘She must stop loving him. He’s not a good man. He’s vulgar. After thirty years
as a student of people, I know what people are. My profession teaches me to
understand people in an evening.’
 ‘Well, perhaps you’re right. But the thing is for Catherine to see it.’
 ‘I’ll give her some glasses.’
♦
 Morris visited Washington Square often. A young man in New York with no
profession has a lot of time. His visits were the most important thing in Catherine’s
life. Each time Morris left the house she thought only of his next visit. Catherine did
not tell her father about these visits. He did not ask: he wanted her to decide
that Morris was no good. Lavinia loved secrets and did not say anything.
 ‘What is happening in this house?’ he asked his sister politely a few weeks
later.
 ‘ “Happening”, Austin?’ Mrs Penniman cried. ‘Why, nothing.’ ‘Lavinia, you’re
not being honest with me,’ he said. ‘Mr Morris Townsend is coming to my house four
times every week, and nobody tells me. Does the young man ask you to say nothing,
or is it Catherine?’
 ‘Catherine doesn’t tell me anything,’ said Mrs Penniman. ‘I find Mr Townsend
very interesting. But that’s all. He tells me a lot about his life and his bad luck.’
 ‘Ah! His bad luck! Tell me about it.’
 ‘It’s a long story. In his earlier life he was bad. He says so. But he paid for it.’
 ‘And now he has no money.’
 ‘And he has nobody in the world.’
 ‘He lost his friends, then, because of his bad life?'
 ‘No, he had bad friends.’
 ‘He has good friends, too — his sister and her children.’
 ‘The children are young and the sister is not nice.’

‘Does he say bad things about her to you? But he lives with her and does
nothing. She pays for him.’
 ‘He’s looking for a profession. He looks every day.’
 ‘He’s looking for it here. The profession of husband to a weak woman with
thirty thousand dollars!’
♦
 Every Sunday evening, the family at Washington Square went to Mrs
Almond’s. The following Sunday, Morris Townsend was also at Mrs Almond’s. He
sat next to Catherine and talked only to her. Catherine was not happy and easy with
Morris because her father was in the room. Her father was sorry for her. Perhaps he
was wrong about Morris. Perhaps Morris was honest and wanted to marry
his daughter for love. The doctor decided to give the young man time.
 Later, he spoke to Morris. ‘I hear you’re looking for a job,’ he said.
 ‘Yes, I am looking for honest, quiet work. Something to bring me an honest
dollar. 1 have only my good right arm.’


‘Yes, your good right arm,’ said the doctor, ‘but you have a clever head, too.
Sometimes I hear about openings. Will you think about leaving New York — going
away?’
 ‘No, I’m afraid not. I must make my life here. My sister is here and I am
everything to her. Her husband is dead and I must help with her five children. I give
them lessons.’
 'That’s good. But it’s not a profession.’
 It won’t bring me a lot of money.’
 ‘Money is not the most important thing,’ said the doctor.
 Later that evening, Morris spoke to Catherine again. ‘Can we meet tomorrow? I
have something to say to you. Not in your house -Mil the square. I cannot come into
your house again. Your father laughed at me because I have no money.’
 ‘Laughed at you? Oh no, you mistake him. Lie’s a good man. You must not be
too proud,’ she said.
 " I’ll be proud only of you,' he said.
 Catherine went quite red. ‘Now you’re laughing at me,’ she said. ‘You know
I’m not pretty or clever.’
 Morris made a sound; it was difficult to understand.
 Catherine understood from it that he loved her.
 ‘Come to the house,’ she said. ‘I’m not afraid of that.’
♦
 The next day Morris came to the house. He told Catherine that he loved her.
She sat down suddenly. She said he must go — she wanted time to think. A picture of
a fight with her father came into her head. She was afraid.
 Before Morris left, she said, ‘We must speak to my father. I’ll do it tonight; you
must do it tomorrow.’
 ‘Your father will tell you that I want your money.’
 ‘Then I’ll say that he mistakes you,’ said Catherine.
 ‘Other men are interested only in money, you are not.’

Chapter 4
For Love or Money?
 Catherine heard her father come home that evening. She stood outside the door
of his room for nearly half an hour. Then she went in. He sat in his chair by the fire,
with a cigar in his hand, and read the newspaper.
 ‘I have something to say to you,’ she began, very quietly. She sat down. ‘I’m
going to marry Morris Townsend.’ The doctor looked at her. ‘When did he ask you?’
 ‘This afternoon — four hours ago,’ she answered.
 ‘Usually the man asks the girl’s father. Is he afraid to ask me? You’re moving
very fast.’
 ‘He says he loves me. And I like him very much.’
 ‘But you met only a few weeks ago.’
 ‘I liked him from the beginning.’
 ‘I know that you’re not a little girl now, but a woman. But I don’t like Morris
Townsend. I’m sorry that you didn’t ask me first. I was too easy with you.’
 ‘I was afraid of your opinion. But, father, you don’t know him,’ she said.
 ‘You don’t know him. He only shows you half the man.’
 ‘You think he wants my money.’
 ‘Why do I think he’s the wrong man? I’ll tell you.’ And he smoked his cigar for
a minute. ‘I think that your money is more important to him than is right. Perhaps a
clever young man will fall in love with you and not be interested in your dollars.
You’re an honest, loving girl. But what do we know about this clever young man? We
know that he lost his money because he lived a bad life. Now, he’s looking for more
money to lose and he has his eye on your money.’
 ‘That’s not the only thing we know about him, father. He wants to do
something very much. He’s honest and he’s good. And he lost very little money.’
 ‘Then he was not careful with it,’ said the doctor. He got up with a laugh.
Catherine stood up. He put his arm round her. ‘I’m sorry for you. I’ll see Mr
Townsend tomorrow.’

‘Yes, Dr Sloper,’ said Morris the next afternoon. ‘We arrived quickly at an
understanding. But then I was interested in Miss Sloper the first time I saw her.’
 ‘Were you interested in her before you saw her?’
 ‘I knew she was a beautiful girl.’
 ‘I'm her father and I love her very much. I’m her father and I know that she is
not “a beautiful girl”. I told Catherine yesterday that I do not like your plans.’
 ‘I’m very sorry,’ answered Morris. He looked at the floor.
 ‘I don’t want my daughter to marry a man with no money and no profession.
My daughter is a weak young woman and will be quite rich when I die.’
 ‘I’m not interested in her money. You have my word.’
 ‘I want more than your word.’
 ‘What can I do to get your good opinion?’
 ‘Nothing. I do not want to give you my good opinion.’
 ‘But I love Catherine. I’m going to work hard. My old life is behind me.
Without me she won’t be happy.’
 ‘I want you to break with her now,’ said the doctor. ‘For six months she will
perhaps not like me. I can wait. She’ll see that a life with you can never be happy.’
 ‘Ah, sir, you are not polite!’ Morris cried angrily.
 ‘You push me too hard, Mr Townsend,’ the doctor answered.
 ‘Perhaps Catherine will not want to break our understanding. She won’t forget
me easily. I have nothing more to say.’ Morris left the room. 

‘But I love Catherine. I’m going to work hard. My old life is behind me. Without me
she won’t be happy.’
 Dr Sloper decided to visit Morris Townsend’s sister, Mrs Montgomery. She
lived in a pretty little red house with a pretty garden. She was a small woman with
blue eyes and an honest face. At the moment her face was a little red. She did not
usually have visits from important society people.
 Dr Sloper began. ‘Your brother wants to marry my daughter. 1 want to learn
about him. Tell me about your brother.’
 ‘I find talking about my brother difficult,’ she said.
 ‘With a husband I don’t like, Catherine will get nothing from me when 1 die.
She has ten thousand from her mother and nothing more.’
 ‘Does Morris know this?’ she asked.
 ‘I’ll be happy to tell him.’
 ‘You say you don’t like Morris. Why?’
 ‘He’s a good man to talk to at a dinner. But I don’t want him to be my
daughter’s husband. 1 think he’s more interested in Morris Townsend than in
Catherine Sloper. Tell me I’m wrong.’

‘No, you are not wrong. But we are all interested in our lives, I think,’ said Mrs
Montgomery. ‘And he’s handsome.’
 ‘Some young men do as little as they can,’ said the doctor. ‘They live on the
love of other people. And ninety-nine times out of a hundred, those other people are
women. You, my sister, Lavinia, and Catherine are all working to make an easy life
for Morris.’
 Mrs Montgomery’s eyes were suddenly wet. She moved her head proudly. "I
don’t know how you know this!’ she cried.
 ‘Now,’ said the doctor. ‘Answer this: Do you give your brother money?’ She
answered yes.
 ‘Do you have much money?’ She answered no.
 ‘Does your brother know this?’ She answered yes.
 ‘I hear that your brother teaches your children.’
 Her eyes were suddenly big and round. ‘Oh, oh yes,’ she said quickly, ‘he
teaches them Spanish.’

‘Now’, said the doctor. ‘Answer this: Do you give your brother money She answered
yes.

The doctor laughed at this answer. ‘Spanish! That will help them! Now 1 know
the answer to my question. Your brother lives on you.’ Mrs Montgomery began to
cry. ‘I know he’s a clever man. But he’s not the right man for my Catherine. You
must meet her. Then you’ll understand me.’
 ‘Yes,’ she answered. ‘Please bring your daughter to meet me.’ And then
suddenly, ‘He must not marry her.’
 The doctor went happily away with these words in his ears. 